The terms and expressions mentioned herein shall have the meanings ascribed thereto, and
expressions that are not defined herein shall have the same meanings ascribed thereto in the
Law or the Implementing Regulations:
1. Kingdom: Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
2. Council: The Council of Cooperative Health Insurance and its General Secretariat.
3. Law: The Cooperative Health Insurance Law applied in the Kingdom.
4. Executive regulations: Executive bylaw Regulation.
5. Policy: This basic health insurance policy, including its schedule, appendices, and
annexes.
6. Health insurance: Health insurance is established by the Law and its implementing
regulation under this policy, with its schedule, appendices, or annexes and it is
practiced by cooperative insurance companies licensed to operate in the Kingdom
under the Insurance Companies Control Law.
7. Health insurance term: The period indicated in the policy schedule for which health
insurance remains valid.
8. Effective period: The number of days during which the policy will be effective if the
full subscription indicated in the policy schedule is not paid.
9. Start date: The date indicated in the policy schedule at which insurance coverage
begins.
10. Effective date: The date on which a person becomes eligible for coverage under this
policy or to add or delete an insured person in the policy.
11. Benefit: Cost of providing healthcare services included in the insurance coverage within
the limits indicated in the policy schedule
12. Insurance coverage: Basic health benefits available to the beneficiary
as specified in the policy
13. Coverage limits: The maximum liability of the insurance company as specified in the
policy schedule for any insured person before applying the deductible.
14. Insurance parties: Insurance Company, brokerage firm, service providers, revenue
cycle Management Company, third-party administrators (TPAs), policyholder,
beneficiary and anyone considered a party to the insurance parties under the Executive
Regulations.
15. Insurance company: A cooperative insurance company licensed by SAMA to operate
in the Kingdom and accredited by the CHI to provide cooperative health insurance.
16. Policy Holder: A natural or corporate person in whose name the policy is issued
17. Beneficiary or insured: A natural person (or persons) to whom coverage is provided
under the policy.
18. Employer: A natural or corporate person employing one or more employees
19. Employee: Every natural person working for and under the management and
supervision of an employer in return for a wage, even if the employee is not under his
immediate supervision
20. Dependent(s): Husband or wife, sons up to the age of twenty-five and unmarried
daughters in addition to orphans fostered by foster families, receiving compulsory
health insurance.
21. Service provider: healthcare facilities (governmental/non-governmental) licensed to
provide healthcare services in the Kingdom under relevant laws and rules approved by
the Council, such as hospitals, general, and specialized medical complexes, diagnostic
centers, clinics, pharmacies, laboratories, physiotherapy, or radiotherapy centers.
22. Preferred Provider Network (PPN): A group of healthcare service providers approved
by the CHI and specified by the insurance company to provide healthcare services to
the insured. These services are directly credited to the insurance company's account.
This network includes the following levels of health services:
- Level 1 (primary health care).
- Level 2 (public hospitals).
- Level 3 (specialized or reference hospitals).
- Other complementary health service provider centers (such as One-day
surgery centers, pharmacies, physiotherapy centers, eyeglasses shops,
Telemedicine, Home health care).
23. A hospital: A health facility approved by the CHI, accepted by the policyholder and the
insurance company, and licensed to work as a hospital under the regulations to provide
health services for which compensation may be claimed under this policy.
24. Licensed doctor: Practicing the medical profession with the appropriate scientific
qualification according to the classification of the Saudi Commission for Health Specialties (SCFHS) and is licensed to practice the medical profession by the Ministry
of Health.
Primary care: Health services provided by medical teams under the supervision of
qualified practitioners so that these services are comprehensive, continuous,
coordinated and based on Value-Based Healthcare. Primary care ranges from
counseling and prevention to treatment of organic and psychological diseases for all
ages and categories of beneficiaries, maternity care and child health services,
rehabilitation, palliative care, urgent care services, chronic disease care, population
health and others as needed to serve beneficiaries registered with primary care
providers and under approved medical best practices.
26. Disease: Illness or conditions that affects the insured person and necessarily requires
medical treatment from a licensed doctor before and during the period of health
insurance.
27. Accident: The sudden and unexpected, unforeseen, occurrence physical event during
the health insurance period.
28. Traffic accident: Any accident that results in serious or light damage or partial or total
material loss to property inadvertently due to the use of the vehicle while in motion.
29. Vehicle: Every means of transport on wheels or track, and are driven or carried by
automatic or animal force, including any mechanical or electric vehicle, whether it is a
car or bus, private or public.
30. Employment “occupational” injury: Any accident suffered by the beneficiary during
performance or because of his work. or on his way from his dwelling to his
workplace and back, or on his way from his workplace to the place where he usually
takes his meal or gives his prayer and back. or a the disease established to be
caused by work. The occupational disease duly determined in accordance with the
occupational diseases schedule, taking into account the date of the first medical
diagnosis of the disease is regarded as the date on which the injury is sustained.
31. Personal risks: Any act or practice performed by a person is recognized as a risky
activity if it carries a risk of illness or accident or is expected to cause complications
of a previous illness or injury that are a result of actions not associated with the work
of the insured or regular daily practices such as: dangerous sports (judo, boxing,
karate, wrestling, combat sports), motor, boat and motorcycles racing, paragliding,
parachuting.
Emergency: Urgent medical treatment required by the medical condition of the insured
as a result of an accident or a case requiring prompt medical attention, depending on
the following levels of urgent medical care (1. Resuscitation, 2. Emergency, 3. Urgent
condition that may be resulting in death, loss of one or more organs, or the occurrence
of an accidental or permanent disability situation) as described by the Private Health
Institutions Law and Regulations approved by the Ministry of Health, which determines
how to dispatch emergency cases.
33. Outpatient treatment: The beneficiary visits outpatient clinics for diagnosis or medical
treatment.
34. Day care surgery or treatment: A patient admitted during the course of a day with the
intention of receiving care who does not require the use of a hospital bed overnight
and who returns home as scheduled. It should be noted that their coding and pricing
is in accordance with the hospital's procedure for admission
35. Inpatient (hospital admission): Registration of the insured person as a patient for
admission in the hospital until at least the next morning, including a Patient admitted
with this intention who leaves hospital for any reason without staying overnight
36. Long-term care: A variety of services that include medical and non-medical care
provided to people who are unable to perform activities essential to daily living for
people suffering from a chronic illness or disability, or cannot care for themselves for
long periods. long-term care focuses on individual and coordinated services that
promote independence, improve patients' quality of life, and meet patients' needs over
a long period.
37. Telemedicine: Using electronic information and communication technology means to
provide diagnostic, screening, and medical inspection services to the patient, including,
for example, telemedicine and health using smartphones (Health Mobile). Other forms
telemedicine includes (teleconsultation, tele-expert consultation, remote assistance,
other medical opinions)
38. Alternative medicine (complementary): A variety of healthcare systems, practices and
products that are not part or extension of modern medical practice. Complementary
medicine is used in conjunction with modern medicine, while alternative medicine is
not used with modern medicine at the same time. Examples include but are not the limited to herbal treatment, cupping, Chinese medicine, hypnosis, osteopathy,
chiropractic, acupuncture.
39. Health: A state of complete physical, mental and social health, not just lack of illness
or disability.
40. Allergies: In particular, the individual is sensitive to certain types of food, medicine,
weather, pollen or any other triggers from plants, insects, animals, minerals, elements
or other substances. The individual experiences physical reactions caused by direct or
indirect contact with those substances that cause conditions such as asthma,
dyspepsia, friction, hay fever, eczema, and headache.
41. Congenital Defect: Functional, chemical or structural dysfunction that is usually present
before birth, whether through heredity or as a result of environmental factors
according to medical custom.
42. Pregnancy and childbirth: Any pregnancy or birth, including natural, cesarean and
abortion.
43. Preterm Baby: a baby born before the 37th week of pregnancy (three weeks before
the birthdate)
44. Psychological cases: A disorder of thinking, mood, perception, memory or mental
abilities, some or all of them.
45. Disability cases: Disability means having a total or partial impairment permanently or
for a long period of life in one of the physical, sensory, mental, communicative,
educational or psychological abilities, and causes that the disabled person cannot meet
the requirements of normal life and rely on others to meet them. Or the need for a
special tool that requires training or special qualification for its proper use.
46. Vision correction interventions: Interventions to improve vision and have no effect to
prevent vision loss such as LASIK , lenses and eyeglasses
47. Functional vision correction interventions: Interventions to improve vision that are
important for vision preservation “avoiding vision loss”. For example strabismus and
Amblyopia procedures for children less than 14 years and keratoconus, cataract,
glaucoma for all age groups.
48. Human organ: Any part of the human body (dead or alive), its tissues or any of its
components, which can be used by transplanting them into another human body,
except for blood.
49. Transplant of Human Organs: A medical operation through which the human organ
is removed, or part of it, from the donor's body and implanted in the patient's body,
by any medical and approved means.
50. Rehabilitation: An essential part of comprehensive health care and its applications to
return a person suffering from an occasional or persistent weakness, failure, or defect
to the best level of performance in their family and social life in line with the definition
of health and the application of best approved medical practices.
51. Essential Dental Procedures: Any of the following medical procedures that include 1.
Preventative services (dental consultations, annual examination of teeth and
assessment of their problems, cleaning each beneficiary once a year (including
fluoride), 2. Treating procedures include (fillings, periodontal treatment, teeth extract).
52. Reconstructive surgery: Reconstructive plastic surgery is performed to correct defects,
abnormalities or injuries caused by an accident, infection, tumor or disease.
53. Innovative “Brand” Name: Preparations that contain a new active substance and are
offered under a brand name on the market by the innovative company.
54. Generic medication or treatment: is a product equivalent to the innovative product in
pharmaceutical form, concentration, method of administration, quality, effectiveness,
and therapeutic claim.
55. Premium (subscription): Amount paid by the policyholder to the insurance company
for the insurance coverage provided by the policy during the insurance term.
56. Deductible (Co-payment): Amount, if any, payable by the beneficiary upon receiving
outpatient treatment as specified in the policy schedule, excluding emergencies and
inpatient treatment.
57. The basis of the direct entry or in company’s account: Facilities of non-payment
appointed by the company and available for the insured. All expenses incurred at the
facilities are directly debited from the company’s account.
58. Allowance compensation basis: The method used to compensate the policyholder for
the reimbursable expenses incurred by the insured and submitted a claim for them,
after applying the deductible.
59. Reimbursable Expenses: Expenses paid in return for services, materials and
equipment not excluded under Chapter 3 of this policy that is prescribed by a
licensed physician due to the illness of the insured, provided such expenses are necessary, reasonable, and normal in the relevant time and place based on best
approved medical practices.
60. Claim: A request, accompanied by supporting financial and medical documents,
submitted to the insurance company or representative thereof by the service provider,
the insured or the policyholder for indemnification of expenses of healthcare services
covered by the policy.
61. Supporting documents for a claim: All documents proving the insured's age, weight
and height, nationality, identity, the validity of insurance coverage, the circumstances
of the occurrence of the event resulting from that claim and proof of reimbursement
of costs. It also includes other documents such as a police report, invoices, receipts,
prescriptions, doctor's report, referral and recommendations, and any other relevant
documents the insurance company may request.
62. Fraud: when any of the Insurance Parties performs or refrains from performing an act
aimed at gaining an unfair or unlawful advantage for the benefit of the fraudster or
other parties, or an act that involves fraud or deception that results from obtaining
benefits or money, or providing benefits excluded or exceeding the permissible the
limits to an individual or entity, and the like, according to the Law and Regulations.
63. Abuse: Practices by any insurance party which may lead to obtaining benefits or
privileges they are not eligible to receive; without the intent to defraud, deceive,
misrepresent, or distort facts to obtain such benefits and privileges and what comes
under it under the Implementing Regulations, for example but Not limited to -
exaggerating diagnostic tests and medications.
64. Negligence: Providing insurance/medical procedures without exercising the duly
recognized reasonable amount of medical or insurance precautions that result in
material or moral harm to one of the insurance parties, and which would not have
occurred but for how the negligent person who acted.
65. Age calculation: Process by which age is calculated according to the calendar year
starting at the beginning of January and ending at the end of December.
66. Personal data protection system: The Personal Data Protection Regulations issued by
Royal Decree No. (M/19) dated 9/2/1443 H (16/9/2021)